i minus y n so there are two big issues
here though I'm just saying it less I
don't forget the big one you've raised
here is what is effective activism and
what are we doing with this concept in
2017 na na nu en some types of content
are better consumed as a video and some
are better consumed as a podcast this
conversation and recorded you're about
to hear a 20 minute excerpt from it is
fully one hour and 40 minutes long
brainstorming with the future of
veganism how we can take the human
resources we've got here on YouTube and
all the other resources we can muster
and really start organizing something
positive for the future there's that
catchphrase to save the planet how would
any of us be living our lives what would
any of us be doing at a time if we
really were sincerely motivated to save
the planet and we weren't just thinking
about our next 5,000 views on YouTube so
these are the questions that in frame
the conversation and you're both here
selection of what we get into in this
conversation the guy I'm talking to I
think he's one of the few people who
could claim that he is living his life
as if he's trying to save the planet
Stephen fight I miss Frances name
Stephen fate but that's me his preferred
pronunciation is Stephen psyche what's
more important in this life fight or
fate but look steven is lawyer in
Washington DC primarily involved in
ecology environmentalism etc and you
know like many of us I mean that may
already sound like a wonderful position
to be in as a vegan but like many of us
in his spare time he comes on YouTube
and listens to content from people like
myself because in the real world he
knows amazingly few vegans he's also
looking around for the people he can
cooperate with and collaborate with to
really make something positive happen in
the future for veganism for the
environment for the animals all those
things so if you are willing to donate
one dollar per month to support the
creation of content like this on patreon
hit the link below this channel and you
can download the full conversation an
hour and 40 minutes long and then here
it on your mp3 player while you're doing
the dishes while you're on the
stairmaster while you're shoveling the
snow
oh whatever it is you do know i mean
that that brings us something that I've
been thinking about quite a bit
especially in the context of your
critiques of direct action everywhere
yeah which is I think one of the
profound challenges for all sorts of
vegan activism not also a start that's
not sure for the sort of baseline
activism of producing vegans out of non
vegans obviously there are you know
other things that are that are quite
measurable but a lot of the kind of core
baseline activism is really hard to
measure in terms of effectiveness and
and I know these days affected activism
is like the new hot saying and all
anyone talks about and early in some
circles maybe maybe the weird corners of
the internet that I spend my time on but
I think that we as a population of
vegans have to really reckon with this
question of what it means to have a lot
of our activism be not just not just we
aren't measuring it but in a lot of ways
you don't have good ways of measuring it
or maybe the ways to measure it will be
really expensive and also just this fact
that I think and I could be wrong I
don't know how people for the ethical
treatment of animals organizes itself
internally but I have to imagine that a
lot of their logic is we need small
victories that are consistent that we
can tell our supporters because it's not
easy to say I can tell you're from
Washington I can stop you for watching
Claudia but just just this idea that
that as if you're right you're raising
money to say we're going to try to
convince people to go vegan and then a
year later you have to show people what
you did I mean you can talk about like
what you're doing in the streets and
there are all these huge ad buys and
cities all over the world for these go
vegan billboard Yochai think are awesome
but I just think
solution I'm just creating a problem
well you hit the nail on the head there
with the example you've given us so
there are two big issues here though I'm
just saying that less I don't forget the
big one you've raised here is what is
effective activism and what are we doing
with this concept in 2017 but the
example you're raising of what pedda
does people for Ethical Treatment
animals what they really do is in
old-fashioned political parlance
ambulance-chasing you're exactly right
they're always scoring these little
victories and sometimes their connection
to the victory is really nebulous you
know what like what exactly did you do
like they showed up and took credit for
it in the in the press so give you an
example here because I've just been
through their annual report so pedda
donated 66 state-of-the-art surgical
simulators to replace the deadly use of
thousands of dogs pigs and other animals
in surgical training programs in nine
countries Bolivia Iran Mexico and others
so this is the kind of thing they're
doing you know obviously I mean it's so
they they donated i'm guessing 66 fancy
computers you can do a cost estimate on
that I know what that is but it's
exactly it's this ambulance-chasing it's
saying hey we're we're doing these
little these little projects all the
time they had a they so they had this
kind of in terms of pure
ambulance-chasing the United States
Coast Guard was using animals in cruel
and deadly exercises and pettah released
video footage of these cruel tease and
wrote a bunch of letters to the press
and caused the fuss and caused the
scandal and they claimed credit for
changing the US Coast Guard's policies
now how much did pettah actually do it
is pedda actually responsible for the
film I doubt it but I don't know the
story but there are these little
everyday little victories and this is
how they you know earn the you know the
loyalty of their donors and I'm not even
going to hate on it those as we said you
know they're constantly pilloried for
this they have the
posters with you know sexy women
whatever percentage of their you know
advertising revenue comes from that I
don't know but a lot of people in
veganism are using scantily clad women
to promote themselves promote their
YouTube channel it would have you pet
aren't doing what's doing it but there's
certainly a variety of exactly that type
of old-fashioned politicking of you know
you found out the Coast Guard is doing
something bad chase it down get in the
local newspaper make noise and then when
they when they buckle claim the victory
we did it it's because of us just
because we wrote the letter to the
newspaper or whatever and you know I
don't even know if they they put some on
an airplane who actually showed up to do
anything and that's their annual report
as a whole list it's just an endless
list unorganized list of those types of
little angel and chasing activities and
you know I have some respect for that
some on the other hand you have to live
it eleven million dollar budget to print
a magazine I've never seen that magazine
on the store shelves I've never seen it
in airport I've never seen in the coffee
shop so a lot of magazines do not have
an 11 million dollar budget you know a
sinking budget a budget that on to earn
back 11 million dollars in charity per
year and yet I managed to see them quite
a bit more successful to protect us
magazine that may indeed contain those
types of news stories so yeah it's a
bizarre juxtaposition to be sure um okay
what is effective activism I've got to
say I'm really quite depressed by that I
do think that France Ionian is in his
newest book manages to kick the ball a
little bit further down the field and it
has been because I've seen the concept
of effective activist and really become
a religious concept where people just
evoke the name of effective activism to
mean whatever it is we already believe
in any way I don't see any sincere
openness to questioning effective
activism and when you talk about
measuring effective activism I mentioned
this briefly less time starting to mount
vegans like well look when i was doing
this stuff in cambodia and laos
we were actually measuring the impact of
programs there's a protocol called 3ie
impact evaluation and protocol is an
international standard used in charity
work humanitarian development I eat
intervention what have you and were you
actually are looking at okay we spent
ten million dollars trying to prevent
the spread of AIDS how effective was it
and that is that's real work and that's
research that is a real budget and so on
and now look and so most of that stuff
and the difference is that there are
actual interventions the actual impact I
think like most of the stuff we're
talking about veganism I think everyone
involved in this sort of pseudo
religious discourse they already know
there is no no impact there's no impact
to measure so maybe that's why it's so
insincere the question of what is you
know what is effective advocacy or what
is effective activism they just say so
like like a really simple one in
Cambodia you did an education program to
try to teach gay men Oh games and you
did a baseline survey before the
intervention for how often gay men use
condoms and a bunch of other questions
and then you did the intervention and
then you a follow-up survey maybe two
years later and you find out how the
behaviour of gay men and Cambodia have
changed I asked that's er that's real
impact research you know I'm saying and
write correctly nation oh yeah that's I
used to earn my living that way that's
correct yeah I political science yes I
was paid and incredibly low salary to do
research but the crux the thing is you
have an intervention there that actually
does have an evac or could have an
impact or should you know like educating
gay men about condoms as an impact I
don't know of anyone in veganism is
doing anything they believe in having
those impacts to even that modest extent
that you know taking someone aside and
telling them hey look this is a condom
you know and this could be a
life-or-death decision for you
oh yeah I put the ball in your court i
don't know what's after that you know no
I mean I think it's just I think I think
there's also there's a lot of different
pessimistic ways I can go but I just I
guess I'm going to maybe rattle off a
couple of loosely connected thoughts I
think we see the growth of youtubers
they're vegan youtubers and receive the
growth in like vegan food products and
and there's so much of this optimism I
mean plant-based news class just kids
like vegan 2016 video and he was like
you know we're winning and everything
and um I think I listened to when I
first discovered what was a vegan
revolution I listen to like two of his
podcast and in one of them he happened
to say like oh yeah i really think that
like vegans are going to be the majority
in the UK in like five or six years at
this point I think I I think i was
walking alone listening to headphones
and audibly laughed out loud but but
just just 11 on point of information for
all of this winning that we're doing in
2016 in the United States the United
States consumed more meat than it has
any year since 2006 so all those graphs
about how meat consumption is declining
is that about meat prices in a global
recession or is that about all of our
amazing vegan activist I think probably
the former yeah obviously from our
perspective veganism is not a fad is
something important there's a deep
intellectual backing behind it but at
least in the United States and and to a
degree in other countries at least in
Argentina when I was there there is a
sense in which egan ism is is writing a
cultural ways and where there's sort of
a social signaling that restaurants want
to make it very clear that even if
you're not vegan don't worry we have
vegan options and like worship and we're
cool
and there is a sense there or there is a
sense in which veganism is a fad for a
large chunk of the relevant discussion
and like all fad it will fade and we'll
get to the new place where now the thing
that restaurants want you to know is
that the animals that they're killing
and serving you we're like quote unquote
treated humanely and like no no we don't
have vegan options because don't worry
because all our cows were super happy
when we murder them um like it yeah so
that is why I'm I'm just broadly
pessimistic so I'm I'm probably the one
per you know I just have this video up
now saying why I am NOT left-wing I'm
one of the only people who's comfortable
with discussing the issue of elitism
within veganism or the the interaction
between veganism and elitism and you
know I'll give you one one example of
good news that I actually could not
believe when it was told to me like you
know people say that I don't believe it
in a casual way I mean I actually SAT
there thinking is this a lie is the
person telling me this insane and all
the friend of mine someone I've known
for ages who is a philosophy major in
Europe and it goes to a lot of
philosophy conferences so academic
conferences for people who generally
have PhDs and philosophy or that kind of
thing um she said that in the
Netherlands now in the Netherlands
veganism is so common in that elite
social class that on the forms you fill
out when attending a philosophy
conference in Netherlands it says
dietary restrictions other than vegan
they no longer have a check mark for
vegan because such a large percentage
the people showing up we're vegan and
the conference is going to be vegan
anyway so you show me that that the
forms now they don't have a check mark
for vegan because this is this is among
people who are you know specialized some
of them will be undergraduates some of
them will be graduates but these are
people who are me
he majors at whatever level dietary
preferences other than vegan there's no
box for vegan and I SAT there and I like
I know where I've known her for years
she's not insane but like I was actually
wondering like has she gone insane like
this can't be true I can't believe this
I was you know I calm down but that's so
hard for me to believe now you know for
me I think that this is not contradict
and either points you made vegans are an
incredibly small minority of the
population there at self-selecting
minority and I think they are going to
reflect certain elite Tennessee's you
know a lot of people on the Left want to
pretend that the vegans represent the
the poor and downtrodden of the world
that they're the workers of the world
rising up to take over ownership of the
factories and some kind of Martius
fantasy I i do not see it that way uh
you know within India vegetarianism is
elitist you know it always has been for
at least three thousand years possibly
five thousand years and the idea of
becoming vegetarian as you move up in
the social hierarchy in India moving up
was very hard to do you know that that's
reflected in society there are obviously
the sense in which the California the
ruling class of California the leisure
to class of California people who own a
yoga mat and have the time and leisure
to go to the gym and do yoga people who
are of a certain level of affluence they
definitely are associate with veganism
and that can be a powerful thing in a
positive way and of course it can be a
powerful thing with a certain kind of
stigma attached to it in a negative way
so look I bring this back to close to
the example you mentioned close as this
video of the year in 2016 close and I
talked a little bit we're not super
close friends I just mention we're in
touch
you know a close wanted my reaction to
that video he said look you know could
you watch the video and some worse think
about it so I did watch the whole thing
which otherwise I wouldn't have to be
honest with you and you know there's a
moment in that video from a protest in
London that just happened where they had
two thousand people at this protest
apparently I was from memory but I think
it was a 2000 people protest on it was a
pro llegan you know protest and they
have these very dramatic speeches these
people sitting there and screaming about
how they're going to change the world or
some [ __ ] and now next year next year
they could have 20,000 people instead of
two thousand people or them and you know
I said to close in my email said to me
this is not a victory 2,000 people who
show up in a park and then go home
afterwards is not a victory what I am
interested instead and you you come from
a political background in Washington
you'll really does melee I want to know
how many of those two thousand people
have each other's phone numbers now how
many of them will still know each other
one year from now in the United States I
read a hard political science report on
the success of the so-called Tea Party
movement which really was a plurality of
small movements but the long story short
about this is hard physical science
research was the mainstream press thinks
the Tea Party is a joke it's not a joke
and they looked at over time how many of
the Tea Party groups were still having
monthly meetings monthly town hall
meetings at those monthly meetings what
percentage of the people knew on a
first-name basis or had a phone number
for or an email for other people in the
group all the kind of classical
old-school measures of social capital
they were actually meeting Ashley
cooperating and those were town hall
meetings that had homework incredibly
rare in any kind of sincere you know
where they would meet and they would say
okay before the next meeting we need
everyone to read this legislation or you
know some technical document you know
related to local city hall or the local
state legislature we need everyone to
read it before you come back so before
you can attend the next meeting
whether it's two weeks later a month
later you know you can photocopy it but
here are the documents you need to read
and the people would actually do it and
come back so the point was yes the tea
party may not have maintained headline
status in the newspapers why would they
they actually did form classical real
units of cohesive social organization
and they were effective in lobbying
their local governments for a list of
social change than 1 i'm looking at this
protest in london maybe I'm a cynic I
don't think anyone there was making
those those connections I don't think I
don't think I did the basis for a
movement to do anything I I don't think
i'm looking at a movement at all and you
know i i'd be delighted if i'm wrong
yeah i mean that that also i don't know
if this is the be perception that you've
gotten but something that occurred to me
recently again this is going back to the
site that i guess is being spearheaded I
cheetah about like whether we should
have hard thresholds about like what
veganism is and isn't and you know I
guess dredging up the Franchione e-type
debate is I get the sense that at least
on YouTube there's a real feeling that
like veganism started basically when
like freely started her YouTube channel
or even though that was like proto
veganism and that veganism has really
only been around like 2012 or 2013 and
it's remarkable to me how there is no
collective sense of any kind of
intellectual or even even just a factual
history yeah a group of people that
identifies beings and have been doing
this for not not a very long time but
you know many decades yes like and
there's no interest in what was
happening for the ages i I don't know of
any movement that
um that has that kind of not not a
disdain which is a complete indifference
to its history and I mean you look at
became not super well versed but
familiar with the one of the debates
between I guess was Booker T Washington
and web2 boys in the United States in
the early 20th century and in the civil
rights movement I don't know if those
debates have a ton of applicability to
civil rights roles today but I do know
that like when thinking about civil
rights you would want to learn and read
about that right and and it just it's
remarkable to me how a historical
there's so many and maybe there's a
YouTube thing maybe there's a young
people think maybe it's just that we
don't him yeah I'll all be all the
devil's advocate on that one because
I've been I've been going through the
more academic literature lately as you
know some of the stuff have put up as
book reviews and in some cases I've
actually made videos that our patreon
exclusive apologizing that I'm not going
to do the book of you because the book
is so stupid or so crazy like a lot a
lot of the academic discourse is garbage
but you know one of the reasons why
people forget is sometimes they want to
forget and you know no it says no
surprise there but you know I tried to
kind of lead my my youtube channel in
having a set of real reflections on how
much veganism has changed just since the
year 2001 when the big knowing is the
big you know the real debates were under
the heading of a narco primitivism and
you know just a few people were
interested in talking about it with me
but most people feel very alienated and
very unfamiliar and afraid but there
were a couple of people who said yeah I
remember that stuff they can remember
the SHAC seven the stop Huntington
animal cruelty group and the debates at
that time but like just the difference
between 2001 vs 2016 one that of course
it's annales 2017 letter saying we use a
round number here at the times this is
15 years looking back in history
and in many ways it's not recognizable
as the same movement which i think is a
legitimate point like what was going on
in 2001 from the perspective of 2016 is
not the same movement and we just did
this debate will night in debate we did
this discussion between myself and my
vegan and we're looking at peter singer
who's still alive i believe i'm going to
you dead yet and peter singers version
of veganism is no longer recognizable as
veganism I don't know if you want to
call that 20 years I don't know we're 30
years or 10 even know I don't want to
put a date on Peters fingers veganism
but if some of some of his some of these
publications are for more than 30 years
ago but I don't know to put a single
year on on one that was current so
actually you know in many many ways i
think it is true that you know
definitely the spirit of the moment more
than anybody else is defined by Gary
frenzy ohne I say that even though I'm a
critic of his I do think that the the
kind of default idea of what veganism is
now is basically the abolitionist idea
was that Edmund said I have open right
here Gary Fran Sione's youtube channel
and i'm looking at 300 views 153 views
168 views the Fran Sione's message can
be summarized in just a few sentences
and we've all heard it before and nobody
wants here in anymore you know I think
veganism is moving on but those those
kinds of simple fundamental assumptions
of what veganism is I'm devil's advocate
on this one I think that the collective
amnesia the lack of interest in even the
recent past of this movement reflects
the fact that we can't we can't even
recognize those precipice precedents as
being part of the same moment I
bunderson